*R-Nvim.txt*                                                  *R-Nvim*
                                  R-Nvim
                          Plugin to work with R

Authors: R-Nvim-toolkit team

Version: 0.9.0
For Neovim >= 0.9.0

 1. Overview                                    |R-Nvim-overview|
 2. Main features                               |R-Nvim-features|
 3. Installation                                |R-Nvim-installation|
 4. Use                                         |R-Nvim-use|
 5. Known bugs and workarounds                  |R-Nvim-known-bugs|
 6. Options                                     |R-Nvim-options|
 7. Custom key bindings                         |R-Nvim-key-bindings|
 8. News                                        |R-Nvim-news|


==============================================================================
1. Overview                                                  *R-Nvim-overview*

This plugin improves the support for editing R code with Neovim.

Feedback is welcomed. Please submit bug reports to the developers. Do not like
a feature? Tell us and we may add an option to disable it.

The plugin should emit useful warnings if you do things it was not programmed
to deal with. Cryptic error message are bugs... Please report them at:

    https://github.com/jalvesaq/Nvim-R/discussions

Git pull requests are welcome.


==============================================================================
2. Main features                                             *R-Nvim-features*

  * Integrated communication with R:
      - Start/Close R.
      - Send lines, selection, paragraphs, functions, blocks, entire file.
      - Send commands with the object under cursor as argument: help, args,
        plot, print, str, summary, example, names.
      - Send to R the Sweave, knit and pdflatex commands.
  * Auto completion of (with `cmp-nvim-r`):
      - R objects (.GlobalEnv and loaded packages).
      - function arguments (if R is running).
      - knitr chunk options.
      - Quarto cell options.
  * Ability to see R's documentation in an editor buffer:
      - Automatic calculation of the best layout of the R documentation buffer
        (split the window either horizontally or vertically according to the
        available room).
      - Automatic formatting of the text to fit the panel width.
      - Send code and commands to R (useful to run examples).
      - Jump to another R documentation.
      - Syntax highlighting of R documentation.
  * Object Browser (.GlobalEnv and loaded packages):
      - Send commands with the object under cursor as argument.
      - Call R's `help()` with the object under cursor as argument.
      - Syntax highlighting of the Object Browser.
  * SyncTeX support for Rnoweb.
  * Special highlighting for R output (.Rout files).
  * Limited support for debugging R functions.
  * Most of the plugin's behavior is customizable.



==============================================================================
3. Installation                                          *R-Nvim-installation*

The installation process is described in four sections:

   3.1. Installation of dependencies
   3.2. Installation of the plugin
   3.3. Troubleshooting
   3.4. Optional steps


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.1. Installation of dependencies

Before installing the plugin, you should install its dependencies:

Main dependencies:

   Neovim >= 0.6.0
      https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases
      See also: https://github.com/neovim/neovim/wiki/Installing-Neovim

      Also cmp-nvim-r if you want auto completion from R-Nvim:
      https://github.com/jalvesaq/cmp-nvim-r


   R >= 4.0.0:
      http://www.r-project.org/

   Notes about the R package `nvimcom`:

     - The R package `nvimcom` is included in R-Nvim and is automatically
       installed and updated whenever necessary. The package requires
       compilation by a C compiler (e.g. `gcc` or `clang`).

     - You do not need to load nvimcom in your .Rprofile because the R-Nvim
       plugin sets the environment variable `R_DEFAULT_PACKAGES`, including
       `nvimcom` in the list of packages to be loaded on R startup. However,
       if you set the option `defaultPackages` in a .Rprofile, you should
       include "nvimcom" among the packages to be loaded (see
       |nvimcom-not-loaded|).

     - On Windows, you have to install Rtools to be able to build the
       package: https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/


Additional dependencies for automatic code completion (Neovim only):

   - https://github.com/hrsh7th/nvim-cmp
   - https://github.com/jalvesaq/cmp-nvim-r

Additional dependencies for editing Rnoweb documents:

   latexmk:       Automate the compilation of LaTeX documents.
                  See examples in |latexcmd|.

   PDF viewer with SyncTeX support and capable of automatically reloading
   documents. This is required only if you edit Rnoweb files.
      On Linux and other Unix systems: Zathura (recommended), Evince or Okular.
      On OS X: Skim.
      On Windows: SumatraPDF.


Suggestions for Unix (Linux, OS X, Cygwin, etc.):

   Tmux >= 3.0:  http://tmux.sourceforge.net
                 Tmux is required only if you want to run R in an external
                 terminal emulator (see |external_term|).

   colorout:     https://github.com/jalvesaq/colorout/releases
                 Colorizes the R output in terminal emulators.
                 (Mostly useful if running R in an external terminal emulator.
                 See |external_term|). You should put in your Rprofile:
                 `library(colorout)`

If running Gnome Shell on Wayland, you may also want to install the extension
"Activate Window By Title" which will be used to raise Zathura window
displaying the PDF file generated from Rnoweb, Rmd or Quarto documents.


Suggestions for bibliographic completion from Zotero:

For RMarkdown (`.Rmd`) and Quarto (`.qmd`) documents:

   - https://github.com/jalvesaq/zotcite
   - https://github.com/jalvesaq/cmp-zotcite


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.2. Installation of the plugin

It is recommended that you use a plugin manager to install R-Nvim.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.3. Troubleshooting (if the plugin doesn't work)

Note: The <LocalLeader> is '\' by default.

The plugin is a |file-type| plugin. It will be active only if you are editing
a .R, .Rnw, .Rd, .Rmd, .Rrst or .qmd file. The the key bindings will not be
active while editing either unnamed files or files with name extensions other
than the mentioned above: Hhowever, see:

  https://github.com/jalvesaq/Nvim-R/wiki/Enable-Nvim-R-for-any-file-type

If the plugin is active, pressing <LocalLeader>rf should start R.

Did you see warning messages but they disappeared before you have had time to
read them? Type the command |:messages| in Normal mode to see them again.

Run the command `:RDebugInfo` which will show information useful to fix some
common issues.

To see messages received by `nvimcom`, put in your `~/.Rprofile`:
>r
  options(nvimcom.verbose = 4)
<
To see messages received by Neovim, uncomment the first line of the function
`ROnJobStdout()` at `R/ninit.luaom.vim` and delete the string "DEBUG:". It will
become:
>vim
  call writefile(a:data, "/dev/shm/nvimrserver_stdout", "a")
<
Then, in another terminal or in another Tmux pane, you would have to use tail
to follow the output:
>
  tail -f /dev/shm/nvimrserver_stdout
<
If R does not start with the <LocalLeader>rf command and you get an error
message instead, you may want to set the path to the R executable (see
|R_path|).
                                                          *nvimcom-not-loaded*
If you see the following message in the R console:
>
   During startup - Warning messages:
   1: In library(package, lib.loc = lib.loc, character.only = TRUE,
                 logical.return = TRUE, : there is no package called ‘nvimcom’
   2: package ‘nvimcom’ in options("defaultPackages") was not found
<
Try quitting both R and Neovim and starting them again.

If you still see the message "The package nvimcom wasn't loaded yet" after
starting R, then R-Nvim could not induce R to load nvimcom. R-Nvim sets the
environment variable `R_DEFAULT_PACKAGES` before starting R. If the variable
already exists, the string ",nvimcom" is appended to it. However, if you set
the option `defaultPackages` in your .Rprofile or in a .Rprofile in the
current directory, the environment variable will be overridden. Thus, if you
have to set the option `defaultPackages`, you should include "nvimcom" among
the packages to be loaded. You might want to include "nvimcom" only if R was
started by R-Nvim, as in the example below:
>r
   if(Sys.getenv("NVIMR_TMPDIR") == ""){
       options(defaultPackages = c("utils", "grDevices", "graphics", "stats", "methods"))
   } else {
       options(defaultPackages = c("utils", "grDevices", "graphics", "stats", "methods", "nvimcom"))
   }
<
Finally, run the command `:RDebugInfo` after <LocalLeader>rf and check the
path where nvimcom was installed.

On Windows, nvimcom compilation will fail if your `.Rprofile` outputs anything
during R Startup. It will also fail with a message about `--slave` not being a
`gcc` option if either `make.exe` or `gcc.exe` from RTools are not the first
ones found in your systems' `PATH` (see |R_path| and |Rtools-path|).


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.4. Optional steps

The plugin should work without the need of any configuration right after
installed, but if you do not like how the plugin works, you could look at the
section |R-Nvim-options| to see if there is an option that could make you
happier.

You can also install additional plugins to get more useful functionality to
edit R code. Please, access R-Nvim's wiki:

   https://github.com/jalvesaq/R-Nvim/wiki


==============================================================================
4. Use                                                            *R-Nvim-use*

By default, R-Nvim will run R in a built-in terminal emulator, but you can
change this behavior (see |external_term|).


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.1. Key bindings

Note: The <LocalLeader> is '\' by default.

To use the plugin, open a .R, .Rnw, .Rd, .Rmd, .Rrst, or .qmd file with Neovim
and type <LocalLeader>rf. Then, you will be able to use the plugin key
bindings to send commands to R.

This plugin has many key bindings, which correspond with menu entries. In the
list below, the backslash represents the <LocalLeader>. Not all menu items and
key bindings are enabled in all file types supported by the plugin (r, rnoweb,
rhelp, rrst, rmd, and quarto).

Menu entry                                Default shortcut
Start/Close
  . Start R (default)                                  \rf
  . Start R (custom)                                   \rc
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Close R (no save)                                  \rq
  . Stop (interrupt) R                                 :RStop
-----------------------------------------------------------

Send
  . File                                               \aa
  . File (echo)                                        \ae
  . File (open .Rout)                                  \ao
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Block (cur)                                        \bb
  . Block (cur, echo)                                  \be
  . Block (cur, down)                                  \bd
  . Block (cur, echo and down)                         \ba
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Chunk (cur)                                        \cc
  . Chunk (cur, echo)                                  \ce
  . Chunk (cur, down)                                  \cd
  . Chunk (cur, echo and down)                         \ca
  . Chunk (from first to here)                         \ch
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Function (cur)                                     \ff
  . Function (cur, echo)                               \fe
  . Function (cur and down)                            \fd
  . Function (cur, echo and down)                      \fa
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Selection                                          \ss
  . Selection (echo)                                   \se
  . Selection (and down)                               \sd
  . Selection (echo and down)                          \sa
  . Selection (evaluate and insert output in new tab)  \so
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Send motion region                                 \m{motion}
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Paragraph                                          \pp
  . Paragraph (echo)                                   \pe
  . Paragraph (and down)                               \pd
  . Paragraph (echo and down)                          \pa
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Line                                                \l
  . Line (and down)                                     \d
  . Line (and new one)                                  \q
  . Left part of line (cur)                       \r<Left>
  . Right part of line (cur)                     \r<Right>
  . Line (evaluate and insert the output as comment)    \o
  . All lines above the current one                    \su
-----------------------------------------------------------

Command
  . List space                                         \rl
  . Clear console                                      \rr
  . Remove objects and clear console                   \rm
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Print (cur)                                        \rp
  . Names (cur)                                        \rn
  . Structure (cur)                                    \rt
  . View data.frame (cur) in new tab                   \rv
  . View data.frame (cur) in horizontal split          \vs
  . View data.frame (cur) in vertical split            \vv
  . View head(data.frame) (cur) in horizontal split    \vh
  . Run dput(cur) and show output in new tab           \td
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Arguments (cur)                                    \ra
  . Example (cur)                                      \re
  . Help (cur)                                         \rh
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Summary (cur)                                      \rs
  . Plot (cur)                                         \rg
  . Plot and summary (cur)                             \rb
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Set working directory (cur file path)              \rd
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Sweave (cur file)                                  \sw
  . Sweave and PDF (cur file)                          \sp
  . Sweave, BibTeX and PDF (cur file) (Linux/Unix)     \sb
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Knit (cur file)                                    \kn
  . Knit, BibTeX and PDF (cur file) (Linux/Unix)       \kb
  . Knit and PDF (cur file)                            \kp
  . Knit and Beamer PDF (cur file)                     \kl
  . Knit and HTML (cur file, verbose)                  \kh
  . Knit and ODT (cur file)                            \ko
  . Knit and Word Document (cur file)                  \kw
  . Markdown render (cur file)                         \kr
  . Markdown render [all in YAML] (cur file)           \ka
  . Spin (cur file) (only .R)                          \ks
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Quarto render (cur file)                           \qr
  . Quarto preview (cur file)                          \qp
  . Quarto stop preview (all files)                    \qs
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Open attachment of reference (Rmd, Rnoweb)         \oa
  . Open PDF (cur file)                                \op
  . Search forward (SyncTeX)                           \gp
  . Go to LaTeX (SyncTeX)                              \gt
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Debug (function)                                   \bg
  . Undebug (function)                                 \ud
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Build tags file (cur dir)                  :RBuildTags
-----------------------------------------------------------

Edit
  . Insert "<-"                                          _
  . Complete object name                     CTRL-X CTRL-O
  --------------------------------------------------------
  . Go (next R chunk)                                  \gn
  . Go (previous R chunk)                              \gN
-----------------------------------------------------------

Object Browser
  . Open/Close                                         \ro
  . Expand (all lists)                                 \r=
  . Collapse (all lists)                               \r-
  . Toggle (cur)                                     Enter
-----------------------------------------------------------

Help (plugin)
Help (R)                                            :Rhelp
-----------------------------------------------------------

Please see |R-Nvim-key-bindings| to learn how to customize the key bindings
without editing the plugin directly.

The plugin commands that send code to R Console are the most commonly used. If
the code to be sent to R has a single line it is sent directly to R Console.
If it has more than one line (a selection of lines, a block of lines between
two marks, a paragraph etc) the lines are written to a file and the plugin
sends to R the command to source the file. To send to R Console the line
currently under the cursor you should type <LocalLeader>d. If you want to see
what lines are being sourced when sending a selection of lines, you can use
either <LocalLeader>se or <LocalLeader>sa instead of <LocalLeader>ss. The
<LocalLeader>m{motion} command sends the lines from the motion command that
follows <LocalLeader>m, e.g. <LocalLeader>m} (from the current line to the end
of paragraph) or <LocalLeader>m3j (the next 3 lines including the current
line).

If the cursor is between any two marks, the plugin will send the lines between
them to R if you press <LocalLeader>bb. If the cursor is above the first mark,
the plugin will send from the beginning of the file to the mark. If the cursor
is below the last mark, the plugin will send from the mark to the end of the
file. The mark above the cursor is included and the mark below is excluded
from the block to be sent to R. To create a mark, press m<letter> in Normal
mode (see |mark|). Normally, marks are not visible, but there are plugins
that highlight them.

You can also use the command `:RSend` to type and, then, send a line of code
to R. If you use this command frequently, you may consider creating a map for
it in your |init.lua|. For example:
>vim
   nmap <LocalLeader>: :RSend
<
Observe that there is an empty space after `:RSend`, so you do not have to
type it.

The command <LocalLeader>o runs in the background the R command `print(line)`,
where `line` is the line under the cursor, and adds the output as commented
lines to the source code.

If the cursor is over the header of an R chunk with the `child` option (from
Rnoweb, RMarkdown, Quarto or RreStructuredText document), and you use one of
the commands that send a single line of code to R, then the plugin will send
to R the command to knit the child document.

After the commands that send, sweave or knit the current buffer, Neovim will
save the current buffer if it has any pending changes before performing the
tasks. After <LocalLeader>ao, Neovim will run "R CMD BATCH --no-restore
--no-save" on the current file and show the resulting .Rout file in a new tab.
Please see |routnotab| if you prefer that the file is open in a new split
window. Note: The command <LocalLeader>ao, silently writes the current buffer
to its file if it was modified and deletes the .Rout file if it exists.

R syntax uses " <- " to assign values to variables which is inconvenient to
type. In insert mode, typing <M--> will write " <- ".

When you press <LocalLeader>rh, the plugin shows the help for the function
under the cursor. The plugin also checks the class of the first object passed
as argument to the function to try to figure out whether the function is a
generic one and whether it is more appropriate to show a specific method. The
same procedure is followed with <LocalLeader>rp, that is, while printing an
object. For example, if you run the code below and, then, press
<LocalLeader>rh and <LocalLeader>rp over the two occurrences of `summary`, the
plugin will show different help documents and print different function methods
in each case:
>r
   y <- rnorm(100)
   x <- rnorm(100)
   m <- lm(y ~ x)
   summary(x)
   summary(m)
<
R-Nvim will not check the class of the first object if the `=` operator is
present. For example, in the two cases below you would get the generic help
for `summary`:
>r
   summary(object = x)
   summary(object = m)
<
To get help on an R topic, you can also type in Neovim (Normal mode):
>vim
   :Rhelp topic
<
The command may be abbreviated to `:Rh` and you can either press <Tab> to
trigger the autocompletion of R objects names or hit CTRL-D to list the
possible completions (see |cmdline-completion| for details on the various ways
of getting command-line completion). The list of objects used for completion
is the same available for auto completion (see |R_start_libs|). You may close
the R documentation buffer by simply pressing `q`.

The command <LocalLeader>td will run `dput()` with the object under cursor as
argument and insert the output in a new tab. The command <LocalLeader>rv will
also run `dput()` with the object under cursor as argument and show the output
in a new tab, while <LocalLeader>vs will show it in a horizontal split, and
<LocalLeader>vv will show it in a vertical split. However, if the object under
the cursor is a data.frame or a matrix, instead of displaying the output of
`dput()`, the commands will save the data.frame or matrix in a text file with
values separated by tab characters and display this file. The command
<LocalLeader>vh will show the `head()` of the data.frame or matrix in a
horizontal split that opens above the current window. This behavior can be
customized, and you can configure R-Nvim to call an external application to
display the data.frame or matrix (see |R-Nvim-df-view|). All files involved in
these operations are created in R-Nvim's temporary directory and deleted when
R quits.

You can source all .R files in a directory with the Normal mode command
`:RSourceDir`, which accepts an optional argument (the directory to be
sourced).

In Normal mode `:RStop` sends to R SIGINT which is the same signal sent when
you press CTRL-C into R's Console. If R does not quit normally, you can kill
it with the `:RKill` command.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    *:Rinsert*
                                                                    *:Rformat*
The command `:Rinsert` <cmd> inserts one or more lines with the output of the
R command sent to R. By using this command we can avoid the need of copying
and pasting the output R from its console to Neovim. For example, to insert
the output of `dput(levels(var))`, where `var` is a factor vector, we could do
in Neovim:
>vim
   :Rinsert dput(levels(var))
<
The output inserted by `:Rinsert` is limited to 5012 characters.

The command `:Rformat` calls the function `style_text()` (if the package
`styler` is installed) or the function `tidy_source()` (if the package
`formatR` is installed) to format either the entire buffer or the selected
lines. The command only works if R is running. If `style_text()` is used the
value of 'shiftwidth' is passed as `indent_by`, and if `tidy_source()` is
used, the value of the `width.cutoff` argument is set to the buffer's
'textwidth' if it is not outside the range 20-180.

Se R help on `tidy_source` for details on how to control the function
behavior.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.2. Editing Rnoweb files

In Rnoweb files (.Rnw), when the cursor is over the `@` character, which
finishes an R chunk, the sending of all commands to R is suspended and the
shortcut to send the current line makes the cursor to jump to the next chunk.
While editing Rnoweb files, the following commands are available in Normal
mode:

   [count]<LocalLeader>gn : go to the next chunk of R code
   [count]<LocalLeader>gN : go to the previous chunk of R code

You can also press <LocalLeader>gt to go the corresponding line in the
generated .tex file (if SyncTeX is enabled).

The commands <LocalLeader>cc, ce, cd and ca send the current chunk of R code
to R Console. The command <LocalLeader>ch sends the R code from the first
chunk up to the current line.

The commands <LocalLeader>kn builds the .tex file from the Rnoweb one using
the knitr package and <LocalLeader>kp compiles the pdf; for Sweave, the
commands are, respectively <LocalLeader>sw and <LocalLeader>sp. You can jump
from the Rnoweb file to the PDF (forward search) with the command
<LocalLeader>gp. The command to jump from a specific location in the PDF to
the corresponding line in the Rnoweb (backward search) is specific to each pdf
viewer:

   Zathura: <C-LeftMouse>
   Evince:  <C-LeftMouse>
   Okular:  <S-LeftMouse>
   Skim:    <S-Cmd-Click>
   Sumatra: <Double-click>

In any case, the pdf viewer must be started by the R-Nvim plugin. See
|R-Nvim-SyncTeX| for details.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.3. Omni completion

If `cmp-nvim-r` (a source for `nvim-cmp`) is installed, Neovim can
automatically complete the names of R objects as you type them.

R-Nvim does not complete the names of all functions of all installed packages
(see |R_start_libs|).

For both `library()` and `require()`, when completing the first argument, the
popup list shows the names of installed packages.

Neovim uses one file to store the names of .GlobalEnv objects and a list of files
for all other objects. The .GlobalEnv list is stored in the `$NVIMR_TMPDIR`
directory and is deleted when you quit Neovim. The other files are stored in the
`$NVIMR_COMPLDIR` directory, are automatically updated and remain available
unless you manually delete them.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.4. The Object Browser

You have to use <LocalLeader>ro to either open or close the Object Browser on
the same tab page. If it is already open on another tab page, it will be
closed there and opened again in the current one. The Object Browser has two
views: .GlobalEnv and Libraries. If you press <Enter> on the first line of the
Object Browser it will toggle the view between the objects in .GlobalEnv and
the currently loaded libraries.

In the .GlobalEnv view, if a data.frame column has the attribute "label", it
will also be displayed. For instance, the code below would make the Object
Browser display the variable labels of an imported SPSS dataset:
>r
   library(foreign)
   d <- read.spss("/path/to/spss/dataset.sav", to.data.frame = TRUE)
   vlabs <- attr(d, "variable.labels")
   for(n in names(vlabs))
       attr(d[[n]], "label") <- vlabs[[n]]
<
In the Object Browser window, while in Normal mode, you can either press
<Enter> or double click over a data.frame or list to show/hide its
elements (not if viewing the content of loaded libraries). If you are running
R in an environment where the string UTF-8 is part of either LC_MESSAGES or
LC_ALL variables, Unicode line drawing characters will be used to draw lines
in the Object Browser. This is the case of most Linux distributions.

In the Libraries view, you can either double click or press <Enter> on a
library name to see its objects. In the Object Browser, the libraries have the
color defined by the PreProc highlighting group. The other objects have
their colors defined by the return value of some R functions. Each line in the
table below shows a highlighting group and the corresponding type of R object:

	 PreProc	libraries
	 Include	environment
	 Number		numeric
	 String		character
	 Special	factor
	 Boolean	logical
	 Type		data.frame
	 StorageClass	list
	 Structure	s4
	 Function	function
	 Statement	control flow (for, while, break, etc)
	 Comment	promise (lazy load object)

One limitation of the Object Browser is that objects made available by the
command `data()` are only links to the actual objects (promises of lazily
loading the object when needed) and their real classes are not recognized in
the GlobalEnv view. The same problem happens when the `knitr` option
`cache.lazy=TRUE`. However, if you press <Enter> over the name of the object
in the Object Browser, it will be actually loaded by the command (ran in the
background):
>r
   obj <- obj
<
Notes:

  - If either the Object Browser is open or cmp-nvim-r is installed, the
    list of .GlobalEnv objects will be automatically updated by R after each
    successful evaluation of command. This may slowdown R if its workspace has
    too many objects, data.frames with too many columns or lists with too many
    elements.

  - Names of objects are stupidly truncated if they occupy more than 62 bytes.
    This means that Unicode sequences might be split and become invalid.

  - Active bindings are not included in the list of objects for auto
    completion. Also, they are not included in the Object Browser.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.5. Build a tags file to jump to function definitions            *RBuildTags*

Neovim can jump to functions defined in other files if you press CTRL-] over the
name of a function, but it needs a tags file to be able to find the function
definition (see |tags-and-searches|). The command `:RBuildTags` calls the R
functions `rtags()` and `etags2ctags` to build the tags file for the R scripts
in the current directory.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.6. Debugging R functions (Unix only)                     *debug-R-functions*

The R-Nvim-Plugin has limited debugging facilities available on Unix systems
(not available on Windows). To debug a function with R-Nvim you have to do the
following:

   1. Source the R script where the function is with the `source()` function
      of the `base` package.

   2. In the R Console, run either `debug(funcname)` or `debugonce(funcname)`
      where `funcname` is the name of the function (not quoted). R-Nvim will
      send this command to R Console if you press <LocalLeader>db in Normal
      mode with the cursor over the function name.

   3. Call the function.

See `:Rh browser` for available commands in debugging mode.

For example, if you have a file named `my_function.R` with the following
contents:
>r
   add.one <- function(x){
       y <- x + 1
       print(y)
       return(invisible(NULL))
   }
<
You could debug the `add.one()` function from another script such as:
>r
   source("path/to/my_function.R")
   debug(add.one)
   add.one(7)
<
If you do not want to start debugging the function from its first line,
instead of calling `debug(funcname)` before calling the function, you should
add the line `browser()` to the function at the line where the debugging
session should start. Example:
>r
   add.one <- function(x){
       y <- x + 1
       browser()
       print(y)
       return(invisible(NULL))
   }
<
If you want a conditional breakpoint, you should call the `browser()` command
only if a condition is satisfied. Example:
>r
   add.one <- function(x){
       y <- x + 1
       if(x > 9)
           browser()
       print(y)
       return(invisible(NULL))
   }
<
One limitation is that R-Nvim also does not help you setting breakpoints.
You have to set them manually as explained above.

Another limitation of R-Nvim is that it might be unable to jump to the line in
the source code that is being evaluated if either you have sent the function
directly to the R Console or the function has been sent by the `knitr`
package, without calling the function `source()`. In either case, R-Nvim will
try to find the pattern `funcname <- function(` in the buffer being edited. If
the pattern is found, the cursor will jump to its position.

The highlighting group used to highlight the line being debugged is the
QuickFixLine (see |hl-QuickFixLine|). Its foreground and background colors are
defined by your colorscheme.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.7. Syntax highlight of .Rout files

You can set both foreground and background colors of R output in your
`init.lua`. The example below is for a interface of Neovim with
'termguicolors' (see |true-color|):
>lua
   if vim.o.termguicolors then
     vim.g.rout_color_input    = 'guifg=#9e9e9e'
     vim.g.rout_color_normal   = 'guifg=#ff5f00'
     vim.g.rout_color_number   = 'guifg=#ffaf00'
     vim.g.rout_color_integer  = 'guifg=#feaf00'
     vim.g.rout_color_float    = 'guifg=#fdaf00'
     vim.g.rout_color_complex  = 'guifg=#fcaf00'
     vim.g.rout_color_negnum   = 'guifg=#d7afff'
     vim.g.rout_color_negfloat = 'guifg=#d6afff'
     vim.g.rout_color_date     = 'guifg=#00d7af'
     vim.g.rout_color_true     = 'guifg=#5dd685'
     vim.g.rout_color_false    = 'guifg=#ff5d5e'
     vim.g.rout_color_inf      = 'guifg=#10aed7'
     vim.g.rout_color_constant = 'guifg=#5fafcf'
     vim.g.rout_color_string   = 'guifg=#5fd7af'
     vim.g.rout_color_error    = 'guifg=#ffffff guibg=#c40000'
     vim.g.rout_color_warn     = 'guifg=#d00000'
     vim.g.rout_color_index    = 'guifg=#d0d080'
   end
<
If you prefer that R output is highlighted using your current `colorscheme`,
put in your `init.lua`:
>lua
   vim.g.rout_follow_colorscheme = true
<

==============================================================================
5. Known bugs and workarounds                              *R-Nvim-known-bugs*

Known bugs that will not be fixed are listed in this section. Some of them can
not be fixed because they depend on missing features in either R or Neovim;
others would be very time consuming to fix without breaking anything.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.1. R must be started by Neovim

The communication between Neovim and R will work only if R was started by the
running Neovim instance through the <LocalLeader>rf command. If you use R-Nvim to
start R in an external terminal and, then close Neovim and open it again, there
will be no communication between R and the new Neovim instance.

Please see the explanation on the communication between Neovim and R at the end
of

   https://github.com/jalvesaq/R-Nvim/blob/master/README.md


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.2. R's source() issues

The R's `source()` function of the base package prints an extra new line
between commands if the option `echo = TRUE`, and error and warning messages
are printed only after the entire code is sourced. This makes it more
difficult to find errors in the code sent to R. Details:

   https://stat.ethz.ch/pipermail/r-devel/2012-December/065352.html


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.3. Functions are not always correctly sent to R

The plugin is only capable of recognizing functions defined using the `<-`
operator. Also, only the current function scope is sent to R. See:

   https://github.com/jalvesaq/R-Nvim/issues/34


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.4. Wrong message that "R is busy" (Windows only)

On Windows, when code is sent from Neovim to R Console, the nvimcom library
sets the value of the internal variable `r_is_busy` to 1. The value is set
back to 0 when any code is successfully evaluated. If you send invalid code to
R, there will be no successful evaluation of code and, thus, the value of
`r_is_busy` will remain set to 1. Then, if you try to update the object
browser, see the R documentation for any function, or do other tasks that
require the hidden evaluation of code by R, the nvimcom library will refuse to
do the tasks to avoid any risk of corrupting R's memory. It will tell Neovim
that "R is busy" and Neovim will display this message. Everything should work
as expected again after any valid code is executed in the R Console.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.5. Error if there is no package installed (Neovim on Windows only)

On Windows, Neovim fails to recognize that a directory is not writable, and
this is required by R-Nvim to detect if it is necessary to create the
directory defined by `$R_LIBS_USER` environment variable. Consequently, R-Nvim
does no try to create the directory and nvimcom installation fails. This
problem will happen if you have just installed or upgraded R. The workaround
is to manually open R and install any package with the `install.packages()`
command before using R-Nvim.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.6. ~/.Rprofile should not output anything (Windows only)

The compilation of `nvimcom` during R startup will fail on Windows if your
`~/.Rprofile` outputs anything. Example of how to replicate the bug:
>r
   print("Hello bug!")
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.7 You can't put `syntax enable` in your `init.vim` (OS X only)

It seems that if you put the command `syntax enable` in your `init.vim` on OS
X, file type plugins are immediately sourced. Consequently, some R-Nvim
variables (`disable_cmds`, and `user_maps_only`) will
be used at their default values even if their values have been set in
the `init.vim`. The workaround is do not include the superfluous command
`syntax enable` in the `init.vim`. For details, please, access:

   https://github.com/jalvesaq/R-Nvim/issues/668


==============================================================================
6. Options                                                    *R-Nvim-options*

|auto_start|          Start R automatically
|objbr_auto_start|    Start the Object Browser automatically
|built-in-terminal|   Options to control Neovim's built-in terminal
|external_term|       Command to run R in an external terminal emulator
|silent_term|         Do not show terminal errors
|set_home_env|        Set the value of $HOME for R (Windows only)
|save_win_pos|        Save positions of R and GVim windows (Windows only)
|arrange_windows|     Restore positions of R and GVim windows (Windows only)
|assign_map|          Choose what to convert into ' <- '
|rnowebchunk|         Convert '<' into '<<>>=\n@' in Rnoweb files
|rmdchunk|            Convert grave accent chunk into delimiters
|objbr_place|         Placement of Object Browser
|objbr_w|             Initial width of Object Browser window
|objbr_h|             Initial height of Object Browser window
|objbr_opendf|        Display data.frames open in the Object Browser
|objbr_openlist|      Display lists open in the Object Browser
|objbr_allnames|      Display hidden objects in the Object Browser
|nvimpager|           Use Neovim to see R documentation
|open_example|        Use Neovim to display R examples
|editor_w|            Minimum width of R script buffer
|help_w|              Desired width of R documentation buffer
|R_path|                Directory where R is
|R_app|, |R_cmd|          Names of R applications
|R_args|                Arguments to pass to R
|R_start_libs|          Objects for auto completion and syntax highlight
|Rout_more_colors|      More syntax highlighting in R output
|routnotab|           Show output of R CMD BATCH in new window
|notmuxconf|          Don't use a specially built Tmux config file
|rconsole_height|     Number of lines of R Console
|rconsole_width|      Number of columns of R Console
|min_editor_width|    Minimum number of columns of editor after R start
|applescript|         Use osascript in Mac OS X to run R.app
|tudio_cmd|           Run RStudio instead of R.
|listmethods|         Do `nvim.list.args()` instead of `args()`
|specialplot|         Do `nvim.plot()` instead of `plot()`
|paragraph_begin|     Send paragraph from its beginning
|parenblock|          Send lines until closing parenthesis
|bracketed_paste|     Bracket R code in special escape sequences
|clear_console|       Send <C-L> to clear R's console
|source_args|         Arguments to R `source()` function
|commented_lines|     Include commented lines in code sent to `source()`
|latexcmd|            Command to run on .tex files
|texerr|              Show a summary of LaTeX errors after compilation
|sweaveargs|          Arguments do `Sweave()`
|rmd_environment|     Environment in which to save evaluated rmd code
|rmarkdown_args|      Further options to be passed to `rmarkdown::render()`
|quarto_render_args|  Options to be passed to `quarto::quarto_render()`
|quarto_preview_args| Options to be passed to `quarto::quarto_preview()`
|clear_line|          Clear R Console line before sending a command
|editing_mode|        The mode defined in your `~/.inputrc`
|pdfviewer|           PDF application used to open PDF documents
|openpdf|             Open PDF after processing rnoweb file
|openhtml|            Open HTML after processing either Rrst or Rmd
|strict_rst|          Code style for generated rst files
|insert_mode_cmds|    Allow R commands in insert mode
|rmhidden|            Remove hidden objects from R workspace
|wait|                Time to wait for nvimcom loading
|wait_reply|          Time to wait for R reply
|nvim_wd|             Start R in Neovim's working directory
|after_start|         Commands to be executed after R startup
|after_ob_open|       Commands executed after the Object Browser opening
|debug|               Support for debugging functions
|user_maps_only|      Only user specified key bindings
|disable_cmds|        List of commands to be disabled
|tmpdir|              Where temporary files are created
|compldir|            Where lists for auto completion are stored
|fun_data_1|          What the data.frame to complete function arguments is
|fun_data_2|          Where the data.frame to complete function arguments is
|quarto_intel|        Where the Quarto completion data is
|remote_compldir|     Mount point of remote cache directory
|R-Nvim-df-view|        Options for visualizing a data.frame or matrix
|R-Nvim-SyncTeX|        Options for SyncTeX


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.1. Automatic start: R and Object Browser
                                                          *auto_start*
                                                          *objbr_auto_start*

By default, you have to start R manually with the command <LocalLeader>rf.
If you want that R starts automatically when you load an R script while
starting Neovim, put in your config:
>lua
   auto_start = 1
<
If you want that R starts automatically when you start editing an R script
even if Neovim is already started, put in your config:
>lua
   auto_start = 2
<
See also: |after_start|.

If you want to always start the Object Browser immediately after starting R,
put in your config:
>lua
   objbr_auto_start = true
<
See also: |after_ob_open|.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.2. R in Neovim built-in terminal                   *R-built-in-terminal*
                                                                  *esc_term*
By default, R runs in a Neovim buffer created with the command |:term|,
and the <Esc> key is mapped to stop the Terminal mode and go to Normal mode.
In Terminal mode, What you type is passed directly to R while in Normal mode
Vim's navigation commands work as usual (see |motion.txt|).

If you need the <Esc> key in R, for example if you want to use `vi`, `vim` or
`nvim` within R Console, put in your config:
>lua
   esc_term = false
<
Then, you will have to press the default <C-\><C-N> to go from Terminal to
Normal mode.

R-Nvim sets the option "editor" to a function that makes the object to be
edited in a new tab when `esc_term` = `true` (the default value).

                                                               *close_term*
Neovim does not close its built-in terminal emulator when the application
running in it quits, but R-Nvim does close it for you. If you rather prefer
that the terminal remains open after R quits, put in your config:
>lua
   close_term = false
<
Neovim stops automatically scrolling the R Console if you move the cursor to
any line that is not the last one. This emulates the behavior of other
terminal emulator, but considering that (1) R only outputs something after we
send a command to it, and (2) when we send a command to R, we want to see its
output, R-Nvim will move the cursor to the last line of R Console before
sending a command to it, forcing the auto scrolling of the terminal.

                                                                   *hl_term*
If you are using Neovim, R-Nvim will move the cursor to the end of R Console's
buffer before sending a command to force the scrolling R output, but you can
put the line below in your |init.vim| to disable the auto scrolling of the
terminal:
>lua
   auto_scroll = false
<
You may either use the package colorout (Unix only) to colorize R output or
let Neovim highlight the terminal contents as it was a .Rout file type. Two
advantages of colorout are the possibility of highlighting numbers close to
zero in a different color and the distinction between stdout and stderr. The
value of `hl_term` (`false` or `true`) determines whether Neovim should syntax
highlight the R output, and its default value will be set to `false` if the
package colorout is installed. If you prefer do not rely on the auto detection
of colorout, you should set the value of `hl_term` in your config. Example:
>lua
   hl_term = false
<                                                                    *OutDec*
Right after starting R, R-Nvim will try to detect if either the value of R's
`OutDec` option is `","` or the current R script sets the `OutDec` option. If
you are using Neovim to syntax highlight R's output and it is not correctly
detecting R's `OutDec` option, then, to get numbers correctly recognized, you
should put in your config:
>lua
   OutDec = ','
<                                                                  *setwidth*
On Unix systems, BEFORE sending a command to R Console, if the terminal width
has changed, Neovim will send to nvimcom the command `options(width=X)`,
where X is the new terminal width. You can set the value of `setwidth` to 0 to
avoid the width being set. Example:
>lua
   setwidth = false
<
On Windows, the command is sent to R Console because it would crash R if sent
through nvimcom.

If you have the option 'number' set in your config, R-Nvim will calculate the
number of columns available for R as the window width - 6. If you want a
different adjustment, you should set `setwidth` as a negative value between
-1 and -16. Example:
>lua
   setwidth = -7
<
You can also set the value of `setwidth` to `2`. In this case, nvimcom will
check the value of the environment variable `COLUMNS` AFTER each command is
executed and if the environment variable exists, R's width option will be set
accordingly. This is the most precise way of setting the option "width", but
it has the disadvantage of setting it only after the command is executed. That
is, the width will be outdated for the first command executed after a change
in the number of columns of the R Console window.

                                                               *buffer_opts*
R-Nvim sets the options 'winfixwidth' and 'winfixheight' in the window where R
runs. This prevents the window of being automatically resized in some
circumstances. It also sets the option 'nobuflisted'. You can set the value of
`buffer_opts` to define what options should be set in the R Console buffer.
It is a list of Vim options separated by spaces. Example with its default
value:
>lua
   buffer_opts = "winfixwidth winfixheight nobuflisted"
<
If you do not want to run R in Neovim's built in terminal emulator, you
have to install Tmux >= 2.0, and then put in your config:
>lua
   external_term = true
<
Then, R will start in an external terminal emulator (useful if you use two
monitors and want Neovim and R separate from each other), and Tmux will be
used to send commands from Neovim to R.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.3. Terminal emulator (Linux/Unix only)
                                                             *external_term*
                                                             *silent_term*

Note: The options of this section are ignored on Mac OS X, where the command
`open` is called to run the default application used to run shell scripts.

R will run in Neovim's built-in terminal emulator, unless you set the value of
`external_term`, which can be a boolean value, the name of the terminal
emulator or the complete command to run the terminal emulator. On Windows, the
only boolean values are valid; if `true` R-Nvim will run `Rgui.exe`, and not
really a terminal emulator.

On Linux, the complete command for running the terminal is predefined for the
following options:

    1. foot
    2. gnome-terminal,
    3. konsole,
    4. xfce4-terminal,
    5. Eterm,
    6. (u)rxvt,
    7. aterm,
    8. roxterm,
    9. lxterminal
   10. xterm.

If the value of `external_term` is `true`, the plugin runs the first terminal
emulator that it finds from the above list. If your favorite terminal emulator
is not selected, you may define it in your config. Below are some examples of
how to set the value of `external_term`:
>lua
   external_term = true   -- Run R in an external terminal (or Rgui.exe)
   external_term = 'foot' -- Run R in in foot
<
If you are not satisfied with the way your terminal emulator is called by the
plugin, you may define in your config the variable `external_term` as the
complete command to run the terminal. Examples:
>lua
   external_term = 'xterm -title R -e'
   external_term = 'tilix -a session-add-right -e'
   external_term = 'xfce4-terminal --icon=/path/to/icons/R.png --title=R -x'
   external_term = 'foot -a R -T R --login-shell --log-level error'
<
Please, look at the manual of your terminal emulator to know how to call it.
The last argument must be the one which precedes the command to be executed.

The terminal error messages, if any, are shown as warning messages, unless you
put in your config:
>lua
   silent_term = true
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.4. Windows specific options
                                                           *save_win_pos*
                                                           *arrange_windows*
                                                           *set_home_env*
                                                           *Rtools-path*
If R cannot find either `make` or `gcc` while trying to compile nvimcom, you
should add their directories to the beginning of the `PATH` environment
variable in your config:
>vim
   let $PATH = "C:\\rtools40\\mingw64\\bin;C:\\rtools40\\usr\\bin;" . $PATH
<
By default, R-Nvim will save the positions of R Console and Neovim windows
when you quit R with the <LocalLeader>rq command, and it will restore the
positions of the windows when you start R. If you do not like this behavior,
you can put in your config:
>lua
   save_win_pos = false
   arrange_windows = false
<
If you want R and GVim windows always in a specific arrangement, regardless of
their state when you have quit R for the last time, you should arrange them
in the way you want, quit R, change in your config only the value of
`save_win_pos` and, finally, quit Neovim.

The plugin sets `$HOME` as the Windows register value for "Personal" "Shell
Folders" which is the same value set by R. However, if you have set `$HOME`
yourself with the intention of changing the default value of `$HOME` assumed
by R, you will want to put in your config:
>lua
   set_home_env = false
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.5. Assignment operator and Rnoweb completion of code block
                                                               *rnowebchunk*
                                                               *rmdchunk*
                                                               *assign_map*
                                                               *assign*

In Rnoweb files, a `<` is replaced with `<<>>=\n@`. To disable this feature,
put in your config:
>lua
   rnowebchunk = false
<
Similarly, in Rmd files the grave accent (backtick) is replaced with chunk
delimiters unless you put in your config:
>lua
   rmdchunk = 0
<
You can also define a different shortcut for `rmdchunk`. For example, to use
two backticks instead of one to trigger the completion of the chunk delimiter,
put in your config:
>lua
   rmdchunk = '``'
<
If `rmdchunk = 2` (the default), in addition to creating an empty chunk
block, a single backtick will be converted in inline R delimiters if the
cursor is not at the beginning of the line.

While editing R code, <M--> is replaced with `<-`. If you want to bind other
keys to be replaced by `<-`, set the value of |assign_map| in your config,
as in the example below which emulates RStudio behavior (may only work on GVim
or Neovim):
>lua
   assign_map = '<M-=>'
<
Note: You can't map <C-=> because in Neovim only alphabetic letters can be
mapped in combination with the CTRL key.

To completely disable this feature, put in your config:
>lua
   assign_map = ''
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.6. Object Browser options
                                                            *objbr_w*
                                                            *objbr_h*
                                                            *objbr_place*
                                                            *objbr_opendf*
                                                            *objbr_openlist*
                                                            *objbr_allnames*

By default, the Object Browser will be created at the right of the script
window, and with 40 columns. Valid values for the Object Browser placement are
the combination of either "script" or "console" and "right", "left", "above",
"below", separated by a comma. You can also simply choose "RIGHT", "LEFT",
"TOP" or "BOTTOM" to start the Object Browser as far as possible to the
indicated direction. Examples:
>lua
   objbr_place = 'script,right'
   objbr_place = 'console,left'
   objbr_place = 'LEFT'
   objbr_place = 'RIGHT'
<
The minimum width of the Object Browser window is 9 columns. You can change
the object browser's default width by setting the value of |objbr_w| in your
config, as below:
>lua
   objbr_w = 30
<
If the Object Browser is being created bellow or at the top of the existing
window, it will be 10 lines high, unless you set its height in your config:
>lua
   objbr_h = 20
<
Below is an example of setup of some other options in the config that
control the behavior of the Object Browser:
>lua
   objbr_opendf = true     -- Show data.frames elements
   objbr_openlist = false  -- Show lists elements
   objbr_allnames = false  -- Show hidden objects
<
Objects whose names start with a "." are hidden by default. If you want them
displayed in the Object Browser, set the value of `objbr_allnames` to `true`.

When a `data.frame` appears in the Object Browser for the first time, its
elements are immediately displayed, but the elements of a `list` are displayed
only if it is explicitly opened. The options `objbr_opendf` and
`objbr_openlist` control the initial status (either opened or closed) of,
respectively, `data.frames` and `lists`. The options are ignored for
`data.frames` and `lists` of libraries which are always started closed.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.7. Neovim as pager for R
                                                              *open_example*
                                                              *nvimpager*
                                                              *editor_w*
                                                              *help_w*

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.7.1. Quick setup

If you do not want to see R examples in a Neovim buffer, put in your config:
>lua
   open_example = false
<
If you do not want to see R documentation in a Neovim buffer, put in your
config:
>lua
   nvimpager = 'no'
<
This option can only be set to "no" in the config. It will be automatically
changed to a suitable value if it is set to "no" after Neovim startup.

If you want to see R documentation in Neovim, but are not satisfied with the
way it works, please, read the subsection 6.7.2 below.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.7.2. Details and other options:

The plugin key bindings will remain active in the documentation buffer, and,
thus, you will be able to send commands to R as you do while editing an R
script. You can, for example, use <LocalLeader>rh to jump to another R help
document.

The valid values of `nvimpager` are:

   "vertical"  : Split the window vertically if the editor width is large
                 enough; otherwise, split the window horizontally and attempt
                 to set the window height to at least 20 lines.
                 This is the default.
   "tab"       : Show the help document in a new tab. If there is already a
                 tab with an R help document tab, use it.
                 This is the default if `external_term` = `true`.
   "horizontal": Split the window horizontally.
   "tabnew"    : Show the help document in a new tab.
   "no"        : Do not show R documentation in Neovim.

The window will be considered large enough if it has more columns than
`editor_w` + `help_w`. These variables control the minimum
width of the editor window and the help window, and their default values are,
respectively, 66 and 46. Thus, if you want to have more control over Neovim's
behavior while opening R's documentations, you will want to set different
values to some variables in your config, as in the example:
>lua
   editor_w = 80
   editor_h = 60
<
Unless the value of `nvimpager` is "tabnew", the buffer name will always be
"doc" to force the reuse of the window when users jump from one help page to
another.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.8. R path and application names
                                                                      *R_path*
                                                                      *R_app*
                                                                      *R_cmd*

Neovim will run the first R executable in the path. You can set an alternative
path to R in your config as in the examples:
>lua
   R_path = '/path/to/my/preferred/R/version/bin'
   R_path = "C:\\Program Files\\R\\R-4.0.1\\bin\\x64"
<
On Windows, Neovim will try to find the R install path in the Windows Registry.

The `R_path` variable can also be prefixed to the `PATH` environment variable.
So, it can include more than one directory separated by a `;` on Windows or a
`:` on other systems. This is specially important to include the path to
RTools `bin` directories on Windows. Example:
>lua
   R_path = 'C:\rtools40\mingw64\bin;C:\rtools40\usr\bin;C:\Program Files\R\R-4.0.1\bin\x64'
<
By default `R_cmd` is `"R"` (but it might be the same as `R_app`) and will
be used to run some scripts in the background, such as:
>
   R CMD build nvimcom
   R CMD install nvimcom
   R CMD BATCH current_script.R
<
If it is necessary to call a different application to run the above commands
in your system, you should set the value of `R_cmd` in your config.

By default the value of `R_app` is `"R"` on Unix systems (such as Linux and
Mac OS X). On Windows, it is `Rterm.exe` if R is going to run in a Neovim
buffer and `"Rgui.exe"` otherwise. R-Nvim cannot send messages to `Rterm.exe`
in an external `cmd` window. If your R binary has a different name (for
example, if it is called by a custom script), you should set the value of
`R_app` in your config (and, perhaps, `R_cmd` too). Example:
>lua
   R_app = 'radian'
   R_cmd = 'R'
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.9. Arguments to R                                                   *R_args*

Set this option in your config if you want to pass command line arguments to
R at the startup. The value of this variable must be a |List|. Example:
>lua
   R_args = {'--no-save', '--quiet'}
<
On Linux, there is no default value for |R_args|. On Windows, the default
value is `['--sdi']`, but you may change it to `['--mdi']` if you do not like
the SDI style of the graphical user interface.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.10. Auto and syntax highlighting                              *start_libs*

The list of functions to be highlighted and the list of objects for auto
completion are built dynamically as the libraries are loaded by R. If R is
running, only the names of objects in .GlobalEnv and in loaded libraries are
completed. If R is not running, only objects of libraries listed in
`start_libs` and as the first argument of either `library()` and `require()`
commands in the current buffer will have their names completed. However, you
can set the value of `start_libs` if you want that the functions and objects
of specific packages are respectively highlighted and available for auto
completion even if R is not running yet. By default, only the functions of
vanilla R are always highlighted. Below is the default value of
`start_libs`:
>lua
   start_libs = 'base,stats,graphics,grDevices,utils,methods'
<
                                                            *Rout_more_colors*
By default, the R commands in .Rout files are highlighted with the color of
comments, and only the output of commands has some of its elements highlighted
(numbers, strings, index of vectors, warnings and errors).

If you prefer that R commands in the R output are highlighted as they are in R
scripts, put the following in your config:
>lua
   Rout_more_colors = true
<
When syntax highlighting .Rout files, R-Nvim considers "> " as the prompt
string and "+ " as the continuation string. If you have defined different
prompt and continuation strings in your `~/.Rprofile`, R-Nvim will try to get
them from R, but if they include special characters, you may have to define
them in your |init.lua| too to avoid errors and get them properly highlighted.
For example, if you have in your `~/.Rprofile`
>r
   options(prompt = '\u1b[34m»\u1b[0m ')
<
you should put in your config:
>lua
   R_prompt_str = '»'
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.11. How to automatically open the .Rout file                   *routnotab*

After the command <LocalLeader>ao, Neovim will save the current buffer if it
has any pending changes, run `R CMD BATCH --no-restore --no-save` on the
current file and show the resulting .Rout file in a new tab. If you prefer
that the file is open in a new split window, put in your config:
>lua
   routnotab = true
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.12. Tmux configuration (Linux/Unix only)                      *notmuxconf*


If Neovim is running R in an external terminal emulator, R will run in a Tmux
session with a specially built Tmux configuration file. If you want to use
your own ~/.tmux.conf, put in your config:
>lua
   notmuxconf = true
<
If you opted for using your own configuration file, the plugin will write a
minimum configuration which will set the value of four environment variables
required for the communication with R and then source your own configuration
file (~/.tmux.conf).


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.13. Control of R window
                                                          *rconsole_height*
                                                          *rconsole_width*
                                                          *min_editor_width*

When starting R, Neovim's buffer is split vertically if its width is larger
than:
>
   min_editor_width + rconsole_width + 1 + (&number * &numberwidth)
<
That is, if it is large enough to guarantee that both the script and the R
windows will have at least the desired number of columns even if 'number' is
set. The default value of both `min_editor_width` and `rconsole_width` is
80. If you prefer the window is always split vertically, set these two options
with lower values in your config. Example:
>lua
   rconsole_width = 57
   min_editor_width = 18
<
If you always prefer a horizontal split, set the value of `rconsole_width`
to 0:
>lua
   rconsole_width = 0
<
For a horizontal split, you can set the number of lines of the R window:
>lua
   rconsole_height = 15
<
You should set 'nosplitright' if you wanted the R Console on the left side,
and 'nosplitbelow' if you wanted it above the R script.

Note: If running R in a Neovim buffer, the number of lines and columns will
automatically change if you switch between horizontal and vertical splits (see
|CTRL-W_K| and |CTRL-W_H|). You may request Neovim to try to keep the minimum
width and height of a specific window by setting the options 'winwidth' and
'winheight'. So, if the window is split horizontally and you want a small R
Console window, you should set a large value for 'winheight' in the script
window.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.14. Integration with R.app (OS X only) and RStudio
                                                               *applescript*
                                                               *RStudio_cmd*

If you are on Mac OS X and want to use the R.app graphical application, put in
your config:
>lua
   external_term = true
   applescript = true
<
If you want to run RStudio instead of R set in your config the value of
`RStudio_cmd` to the complete path of the RStudio_cmd binary. Example:
>lua
   external_term = true
   RStudio_cmd = 'C:\\Program Files\\RStudio\\bin\\rstudio'
<
Note: You must manually run a successful comand in RStudio Console before
sending code from Neovim to RStudio. The command might be something as simple as
the number `1`.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.15. Special R functions
                                                               *listmethods*
                                                               *specialplot*

The R function `args()` lists the arguments of a function, but not the
arguments of its methods. If you want that the plugin calls the function
`nvim.list.args()` after <LocalLeader>ra, you have to add to your config:
>lua
   listmethods = true
<
By default, R makes a scatter plot of numeric vectors. The function
`nvim.plot()` do both a histogram and a box plot. The function can be called by
the plugin after <LocalLeader>rg if you put the following line in your
config:
>lua
   specialplot = true
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.16. Control how paragraphs and lines are sent
                                                           *paragraph_begin*
                                                           *parenblock*
                                                           *bracketed_paste*
                                                           *clear_console*

By default, when you press <LocalLeader>pp R-Nvim sends all contiguous lines to
R, that is all lines above and below the current one that are not separated by
an empty line. If you prefer that only lines from the cursor position to the
end of the paragraph are sent, put in your config:
>lua
   paragraph_begin = false
<
If a line has an opening parenthesis, all lines up to the closing parenthesis
are sent to R when you send a line of code to R. If you prefer to send the
lines one by one, put in your config:
>lua
   parenblock = false
<
Bracketed paste mode will bracket R code in special escape sequences when it
is being sent to R so that R can tell the differences between stuff that you
type directly to the console and stuff that you send. It is particularly
useful when you are using a version of R which is compiled against readline
7.0+ or when rice console is used. To enable it, put in your config:
>lua
   bracketed_paste = true
<
Some versions of R's console interpret <C-L> as a command to clear the console
while others have no command to clear the console. You should set the value of
`clear_console`  as `false` if you see `^L` printed in the R's console after
<LocalLeader>rm:
>lua
   clear_console = false
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.17. Arguments to R source() function
                                                           *source_args*
                                                           *commented_lines*

When you send multiple lines of code to R (a selection of lines, a paragraph,
code between two marks or an R chunk of code), R-Nvim saves the lines in a
temporary file and, then, sends to R a command which calls `base::source()` to
run the commands from the temporary file.

By default, R's `source()` is called with the arguments `print.eval=TRUE` and
`spaced=FALSE`. The argument `local=parent.frame()` is passed to `source()`
too because it is run inside another function. But you can either add or
change the arguments passed to it. Examples:
 >vim
   let source_args = 'echo = TRUE'
   let source_args = 'print.eval = FALSE, echo = TRUE, spaced = TRUE'
<
The option `commented_lines` was dropped because it unduly removed lines from
multi-line raw strings if they included a hashtag. See:

   https://github.com/jalvesaq/R-Nvim/issues/743


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.18. LaTeX options
                                                              *sweaveargs*
                                                              *latexcmd*
                                                              *texerr*

To produce a pdf document from the .tex file generated by either `Sweave()` or
`knit()` command, R-Nvim calls:
>
   latexmk -pdf -pdflatex="xelatex %O -file-line-error -interaction=nonstopmode -synctex=1 %S"
<
If `xelatex` is not installed, it will be replaced with `pdflatex` in the
above command. If `latexmk` is not installed, R-Nvim will call either
`xelatex` or `pdflatex` directly.

You can set the value `latexcmd` to change this behavior. `latexcmd` is a
list: its first element is the command to be executed and the remaining
elements are arguments to be passed to the command. Examples:
>lua
   latexcmd = {'pdflatex'}
   latexcmd = {'xelatex'}
   latexcmd = {'latexmk', '-pdf', '-pdflatex="xelatex %O -synctex=1 %S"'}
<
The elements of `latexcmd` may contain double quotes (as in the last example
above), but not single quotes, because R-Nvim will use single quotes to
separate them in an R's `c()` command.

If you want to pass arguments to the `Sweave()` function, set the value of the
`sweaveargs` variable.

If the value of `texerr` is `true`, nvmimcom will output to R Console LaTeX
errors and warnings produced by the compilation of the .tex document into
.pdf. So, you do not have to scroll the R Console seeking for these messages.
However, if R-Nvim cannot not find the LaTeX log file because it is not saved
in the same directory as the Rnoweb, you should set the value of
`latex_build_dir`. Example:
>lua
   latex_build_dir = 'build'
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.19. rmarkdown::render() options
                                                           *rmd_environment*
                                                           *rmarkdown_args*

When rendering an Rmd file, the code can be evaluated (and saved) in a
specified environment.  The default value is `.GlobalEnv` which makes the
objects stored in the Rmd file available on the R console.  If you do not want
the objects stored in the Rmd file to be available in the global environment,
you can set
>lua
    rmd_environment = 'new.env()'
<
Other options to be passed to `rmarkdown::render()` might be defined with
`rmarkdown_args`, as in the example:
>lua
   rmarkdown_args = 'output_dir = "output", clean = FALSE'
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.20. Quarto's render and preview options
                                                       *quarto_render_args*
                                                       *quarto_preview_args*

If you want to send the commands `quarto::quarto_render()` and
`quarto::quarto_preview()` to R with additional arguments, you should define
the values of `quarto_render_args` and `quarto_preview_args` in your
config, as in the examples:
>lua
   quarto_render_args = ', pandoc_args = c("-F", "apafix.py")'
   quarto_preview_args = ', browse = FALSE'
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.22. Clear R Console line before sending commands
                                                              *clear_line*
                                                              *editing_mode*

When one types <C-a> in the R Console the cursor goes to the beginning of the
line and when one types <C-k> the characters to the right of the cursor are
deleted. This is useful to avoid characters left on the R Console being mixed
with commands sent by Neovim. But R-Nvim does not do this by default because
control characters may cause problems in some circumstances. Hence, if you
that R-Nvim adds <C-a><C-k> to every command put in your config:
>lua
   clear_line = true
<
R-Nvim reads your `~/.inputrc` and, if it finds the string "set editing-mode
vi" it will send to R <Esc>0Da instead of <C-a><C-k>. If R-Nvim fails to
detect that R is running in vi editing mode, you have to put this line in your
config:
>lua
   editing_mode = "vi"
<
This might produce a beep when sending commands, and you may want to disable
the audible bell only for R by putting in your `~/.inputrc`:
>
   $if R
       set bell-style none
   $else
       set bell-style audible
   $endif
<
Note: You can't control the bell on Windows; it is hardcoded to run in Rterm
and to not run in Rgui.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.23. Open PDF after processing quarto, rnoweb, rmd or rrst files
                                                           *pdfviewer*
                                                           *openpdf*
                                                           *openhtml*

The plugin can automatically open the pdf file generated by pdflatex, after
either `Sweave()` or `knit()`. This behavior is controlled by the variable
|openpdf| whose value may be `0` (do not open the pdf), `1` (open only
the first time that pdflatex is called) or a number higher than `1` (always
open the pdf). For example, if you want that the pdf application is started
automatically but do not want the terminal (or GNeovim) losing focus every time
that you generate the pdf, you should put in put in your config:
>lua
   openpdf = 1
<
The default value of `openpdf` is `1` on Mac OS X and `2` on Windows. On Linux,
it is 2 on the X Server and on Sway Window Manager and 1 on other Wayland
compositors.

On Windows, R-Nvim will call Sumatra to open the PDF, and, on Mac OS X, it
will call Skim. On Linux, you can change the value of `pdfviewer` in your
config to define what PDF viewer will be called. Valid values are "zathura"
(default, and the one best integrated with R-Nvim), "evince" and "okular".

On Linux, if running on the X server (not on Wayland), the application
`wmctrl` is required to raise both the PDF viewer and Neovim windows. If using
Gnome Shell on Wayland, the extension "Activate Window By Title" is required
(https://extensions.gnome.org/extension/5021/activate-window-by-title/).

If editing an Rmd file, you can produce the html result with <LocalLeader>kr
or <LocalLeader>kh (it may also work with other file types). The html file
will be automatically opened if you put the following in your config:
>lua
   openhtml = true
<
The meanings of different values of `openhtml` are:

   0: Never open the html.
   1: Always open the html.

The browser application called by R-Nvim is whatever is returned by the R
command `getOption("browser")`, unless it is NULL. In this case, R-Nvim will
call `open` on both Windows and Mac OS X, and `xdg-open` on Linux.

Most browser will open a new tab each time they are called instead of
refreshing a document that is already open. So, if you rather prefer that
R-Nvim never tries to open the web browser, put in your config:
>lua
   openhtml = false
<
For Quarto documents, the available key bindings are <LocalLeader>qr (render
document), <LocalLeader>qp (preview document), and <LocalLeader>qs (stop
previewing). The command <LocalLeader>kr achieves basically the same result of
<LocalLeader>kr. The difference is that the generated document is open after
<LocalLeader>kr, and <LocalLeader>qr allows Quarto specific
options (see |quarto_render_args|).


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.24. Support to RreStructuredText file
                                                              *rrstcompiler*
                                                              *strict_rst*
                                                              *rst2pdfpath*
                                                              *rst2pdfargs*

By default, R-Nvim sends the command `render_rst(strict=TRUE)` to R
before using R's `knit()` function to convert an Rrst file into an rst one. If
you prefer the non strict rst code, put the following in your config:
>lua
   strict_rst = false
<
You can also set the value of `rst2pdfpath` (the path to rst2pdf
application), `rrstcompiler` (the compiler argument to be passed to R
function knit2pdf), and `rst2pdfargs` (further arguments to be passed
to R function knit2pdf).


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.25. Allow R commands in insert mode                     *insert_mode_cmds*

R-Nvim commands are enabled for Normal mode, but most of them can also be
enabled in Insert mode. However, depending on your <LocalLeader>, this can
make it very difficult to write R packages or Sweave files.  For example, if
<LocalLeader> is set to the `\` character, typing `\dQuote` in a .Rd file
tries to send the command!

If you want to enable commands in Insert mode, add the following to your
config:
>lua
   insert_mode_cmds = true
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.26. Show/remove hidden objects                                  *rmhidden*

Hidden objects are removed from R workspace when you do <LocalLeader>rm. If
you prefer to remove only visible objects, put in your config:
>lua
   rmhidden = false
<
After removing the objects, R-Nvim will also send CTRL-L to the R Console to
clear the screen. If you have set vi mode in your `~/.inputrc` you might also
want to set CTRL-L to clear the screen, as explained at

https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/104094/is-there-any-way-to-enable-ctrll-to-clear-screen-when-set-o-vi-is-set


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rmarkdown and Quarto:

For either RMarkdown or Quarto documents for academic writting it is
recommended to install zotcite and cmp-zotcite for completing citation keys
directly from Zotero database:

   https://github.com/jalvesaq/zotcite
   https://github.com/jalvesaq/cmp-zotcite

If the reference includes the field "file", you can open this file by typing
<LocalLeader>od in Normal mode with the cursor over the citation key.

If you include Python chunks in your Rmd document, you should put the lines
below in your |init.lua| to get them highlighted:
>lua
   vim.g.markdown_fenced_languages = {'r', 'python'}
   vim.g.rmd_fenced_languages = {'r', 'python'}
<
Lines of Python code are sent to R Console as arguments to
`reticulate::py_run_string()`.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.29. Time to wait for nvimcom loading                                *wait*

R-Nvim asynchronously waits 60 seconds for the nvimcom package to be loaded
during R startup. If 60 seconds are not enough to your R startup, then set a
higher value for the variable in your config. Example:
>lua
   wait = 100
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.30. Time to wait for R reply                                  *wait_reply*

By default R-Nvim waits 2 seconds for R to reply after a request for omni
completion is issued. You can set the amount of time R-Nvim waits (in seconds)
in your config.  Example:
>lua
   wait_reply = 5
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.31. Start R in working directory of Neovim                          *nvim_wd*

When you are editing an R file (.R, .Rnw, .Rd, .Rmd, .Rrst, or .qmd) and start
R, the R package nvimcom runs the command `setwd()` with the directory of the
file being edited as argument, that is, the R working directory becomes the
same directory of the R file. If you want R's working directory to be the same
as Neovim's working directory, put in your config:
>lua
   nvim_wd = 1
<
This option is useful only for those who did not enable 'autochdir'.

If you prefer that R-Nvim does not set the working directory in any way, put
in config:
>lua
   nvim_wd = -1
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.32. Commands to be executed after either R startup or Object Browser opening
                                                             *after_start*
                                                             *after_ob_open*

If you want the execution of Neovim, R, or external commands right after R
startup, set the value of `after_start` in your |init.lua|. The `after_start`
variable must be a list of strings. Strings representing Vim commands must
start with `:`, R commands must be prefixed with `R:`, and external commands
must be prefixed with `!`.

You can put commands in your `~/.Rprofile` that will be run only if R was
started by R-Nvim as in the example below:
>r
   if (Sys.getenv("NVIMR_TMPDIR") == "")
       cat("~/Rprofile: R was called by R-Nvim\n", file = stderr())
<
However, if for any reason you `~/.Rprofile` is not being sourced, you can
include in `after_start` R commands that should be executed during R startup
(more precisely, during `nvimcom` loading). Example:
>lua
   vim.g.after_start = {'R: cat("R_after_start: R was called by R-Nvim\\n", file = stderr())'}
<
Note: The loading of `nvimcom` will fail if the command to be executed is
invalid. In the example above, we have had to use `\n` in VimScript but `\\n`
in Lua.

For an example of Vim command, if you want that the R script window is hidden
right after R startup, put in your config:
>lua
   after_start = {':hide'}
<
R-Nvim stores the environment variable $WINDOWID of the terminal where R is
running as $RCONSOLE. Thus, if you are running R in a external terminal
emulator on the X server (not on Wayland) on Linux, `~/bin` is in your path,
and you want to resize and change the positions of the terminals containing
Vim and R, you may create a script `~/bin/after_R_start` similar to the
following:
>
   #!/bin/sh
   wmctrl -i -r $RCONSOLE -e 0,0,200,1200,800
   wmctrl -i -r $WINDOWID -e 0,300,40,1200,800
   wmctrl -i -r $WINDOWID -b remove,maximized_vert,maximized_horz
<
Then, make the script executable, and put in your config:
>lua
   external_term = true
   after_start = {'!after_R_start'}
<
Similarly, on Mac OS X, the script below (developed by songcai) will bring the
focus to Neovim terminal window:
>
   #!/usr/bin/env osascript

   --Raise the Terminal window containing name ".R".
   tell application "Terminal"
     set index of window 1 where name contains ".R" to 1
     delay 0.05
     activate window 1
   end tell

   --Click the title bar of the raised window to bring focus to it.
   tell application "System Events"
     tell process "Terminal"
       click menu item (name of window 1) of menu of menu bar item "Window" of menu bar 1
     end tell
   end tell
<
If you want that R-Nvim executes Vim commands right after the Object Browser
is open, set the value of `after_ob_open` as a list of commands. Example:
>lua
   after_ob_open = {':tabnew %'}
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.33. Support for debugging functions                                *debug*

Put the line below in your config if do not want that the cursor jumps to the
line being debugged (when `browser()` is run). Highlighting of the line being
debugged will also be disabled.
>lua
   debug = false
<
R-Nvim puts the cursor in the R Console when the debugging starts. If you do
not want this, put in your config:
>lua
   dbg_jump = false
<
The highlighted debugged line incrementally moves down the buffer with code
execution and, with long scripts, it may stay at the bottom of the window as you
debug. You can hold the highlighted line in the middle of the window with
>lua
    debug_center = true
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.34. Disable R-Nvim commands
                                                            *user_maps_only*
                                                            *disable_cmds*
                                                            *filetypes*

The R-Nvim sets many default key bindings.  The user can set custom
key bindings (|R-Nvim-key-bindings|).  If you wish R-Nvim to only
use those key-bindings specified by the user, put in your config:
>lua
    user_maps_only = true
<
If you want to disable only some of R-Nvim commands, create a Vim list with
their key bindings names in your config. The complete list of key bindings
names is shown at the Custom key bindings section (R-Nvim-key-bindings).
Below is an example on how to disable the commands that sends `setwd()` and
`dput()` to R Console:
>lua
   disable_cmds = {'RSetwd', 'RDputObj'}
<
If you want to disable R-Nvim for a specific file type, create the variable
`R_filetypes` with a list of file types that should be supported. Example:
>lua
   vim.g.R_filetypes = {'r', 'rmd', 'rrst', 'rnoweb', 'quarto', 'rhelp'}
<
If the variable `R_filetypes` does not exist, all file types from the above
list will be supported.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.35. Temporary files directories
                                                                  *tmpdir*
                                                                  *compldir*

You can change the directories where temporary files are created and
stored by setting in your config the values of `tmpdir` and
`compldir`, as in the example below:
>lua
   tmpdir = '/dev/shm/R_tmp_dir'
   compldir = '~/.cache/R-Nvim'
<
The default paths of these directories depend on the operating system. If you
want to know what they are, while editing an R file, do in Normal mode:
>vim
   :echo g:rplugin.tmpdir
   :echo g:rplugin.compldir
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.36. Auto completion
                                                              *fun_data_1*
                                                              *fun_data_2*
                                                              *quarto_intel*

There are two ways of getting automatic completion of R objects names while
you type: using R-Nvim's built-in completion system (as a source for
`nvim-cmp`) and using a language server. See:

   https://github.com/jalvesaq/cmp-nvim-r
   https://github.com/REditorSupport/languageserver

The advantage of R-Nvim's built-in system is the ability to complete objects
of the R's workspace (`.GlobalEnv`), including column names of data.frames.

Note: If you are using the `languageserver` package, you should disable its
auto completion feature in your `~/.Rprofile` to get completions from
`cmp-nvim-r`:
>r
   options(languageserver.server_capabilities =
           list(completionProvider = FALSE,
                completionItemResolve = FALSE))
<
If you prefer to get completions from the language server, `cmp-nvim-r` should
not be installed.

While completing function arguments, R-Nvim may include column names from the
data.frame passed as the first argument, and you may set in your config the
list of functions that might benefit from this kind of completion. The example
below sets `fun_data_1` to its default value:
>lua
   fun_data_1 = {'select', 'rename', 'mutate', 'filter'}

R-Nvim can also include column names from a data.frame passed as the first
argument of the parent function. For example, if you were typing
>r
   with(my_data_frame, lm(
<
and, then, trigger auto completion, the column names of `my_data_frame` would
be included in the completion menu. By default, only the function `aes` (if
passed as argument for `ggplot`) and the functions `lm`, `glm` or `lmer` (if
passed as argument for `with`) will have column names of the first argument of
the parent function included in the completion menu. You have to set the value
of `fun_data_2` in your config to include more functions. `fun_data_2` is a
dictionary with parent functions as keys. The value of each key is a list of
functions that are expected to be nested in the parent function. If the name
of the nested function is `*`, it will match name. Example:
>lua
   fun_data_2 = {ggplot = {'aes'}, with = {'*'}}
<
Note: The algorithm for finding the first argument of the parent function is
very simple and would wrongly recognize `data` as the name of the
`data.frame` in the following code:
>r
   ggplot(data = my_data_frame, mapping = aes(
<
R-Nvim receives the list of objects for auto completion from the nvimrserver
job running in the background. If the list is too big to be transmitted
through nvimrserver's `stdout`, the completion might be aborted.

If editing Quarto documents, R-Nvim will try to find the file
`yaml-intelligence-resources.json` which is part of `quarto` application and
has all necessary information for completion of valid YAML options in an
Quarto document. If R-Nvim fails to find the file, you can set the value of
`quarto_intel` in your config. Example:
>lua
   quarto_intel = '~/Downloads/quarto-1.1.251/share/editor/tools/yaml/yaml-intelligence-resources.json'
<

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.37. Options for accessing Remote R from local Neovim        *remote_compldir*

See https://github.com/jalvesaq/R-Nvim/wiki/Remote-access


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.38. View a data.frame or matrix
                                                              *R-Nvim-df-view*
                                                              *csv_app*
                                                              *csv_delim*


You can see data.frames and matrices in external applications with
<LocalLeader>rv. By default, R-Nvim will generate a `tsv` file from the
`data.frame` or `matrix` and display it in a new tab. But you can change this
by setting the value of `csv_app` which must be a string.

If `csv_app` begins with "terminal:", R-Nvim will open a new tab with the
application running in a terminal emulator. For example, if you want to use
Visidata to see tabular data, put in your config:
>lua
   csv_app = 'terminal:vd'
<
If you are running Neovim within Tmux, you may prefer:
>lua
   csv_app = 'tmux new-window vd'
<
If `csv_app` begins with ":", R-Nvim will append the name of the tsv file
and |:execute| the command. Example:
>lua
   csv_app = ':vsplit'
<
You may also include "%s" in `csv_app` to indicate the position of the tsv
file name in the command to be executed. Example using the `toggleterm.nvim`
plugin which requires the whole command within quotes:
>lua
   csv_app = ':TermExec cmd="vd %s"'
<
You may also try to see the table in a graphical viewer such as LibreOffice
Calc:
>lua
   csv_app = 'localc'
   csv_app = 'c:/Program Files (x86)/LibreOffice 4/program/scalc.exe'
<
`csv_app` does not work on Windows.

If the default field delimiter causes problems in your case, you can change it
in your config. Valid values are `"\t"`, `";"` and `","`. Example:
>lua
   csv_delim = ','
<
There is also the option of configuring R-Nvim to run an R command to
display the data. Examples:
>lua
   df_viewer = "relimp::showData(%s, font = 'Courier 14')"
<
The value of `df_viewer` is a string and the substring `%s` is replaced by the
name of the object under the cursor.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.39. SyncTeX support                                         *R-Nvim-SyncTeX*

SyncTeX is a communication system used by some PDF viewers and by some text
editors which allow users to jump from a specific line in the text editor to
the corresponding line in the PDF viewer and vice-versa. R-Nvim has support
for SyncTeX in five applications:

   Linux:   Zathura, Evince and Okular
   OS X:    Skim
   Windows: SumatraPDF

To completely disable SyncTeX support, put in your config:
>lua
   synctex = false
<
You do not have to do anything special in your Rnoweb document, if you are
using the knitr package, and are editing single file Rnoweb documents.
Otherwise, keep reading...

If you use `Sweave()` rather than `knit()`, you must put in your Rnoweb
document:
>
   \SweaveOpts{concordance=TRUE}
<
If you work with a master document and child subdocuments, each child
subdocument (TeX and Rnoweb alike) should include the following line:
>
   % !Rnw root = master.Rnw
<
where `master.Rnw` must be replaced with the name of the actual master
document.

Note: The knitr package (as of version 1.7) had at least two limitations:

   - It had no SyncTeX support for child documents. The correspondence data
     point to lines right below child chunks in the master document and not to
     somewhere in the child documents themselves. See:
     https://github.com/yihui/knitr/issues/225

   - It only started registering the concordance after the first chunk. So, it
     is recommended that you put the first chunk of R code just after the
     `\begin{document}` command.

                                                                *term_title*
If running Gnome Shell on Wayland, you have to install the extension "Activate
Window by Title" and set the title of your terminal emulator in your config
in order to have the terminal window raised on SyncTeX backward events.
Example:
>lua
   term_title = 'Terminal'
<

==============================================================================
7. Custom key bindings                                   *R-Nvim-key-bindings*

When creating custom key bindings for R-Nvim, it is necessary to create three
maps for most functions because the way the function is called is different in
each Vim mode. Thus, key bindings must be made for Normal mode, Insert mode,
and Visual mode.

To customize a key binding you could put something like this in your |init.lua|:
>vim
    function! s:customNvimRMappings()
       nmap <buffer> <Leader>sr <Plug>RStart
       imap <buffer> <Leader>sr <Plug>RStart
       vmap <buffer> <Leader>sr <Plug>RStart
    endfunction
    augroup myNvimR
       au!
       autocmd filetype r call s:customNvimRMappings()
    augroup end

<
The above example shows how to add a key binding to start R for <Leader>sr
for just r buffers. The default <LocalLeader>rf still exists. After changing
the maps in your |init.lua|, you have to restart Neovim. If you want to remove the
default mappings, you can set |user_maps_only| .

Only the custom key bindings for Normal mode are shown in Neovim's menu, but
you can type |:map| to see the complete list of current mappings, and below is
the list of the names for custom key bindings (the prefix RE means "echo"; RD,
"cursor down"; RED, both "echo" and "down"):

   Star/Close R:
   RStart
   RCustomStart
   RClose
   RSaveClose

   Clear R console:
   RClearAll
   RClearConsole

   Edit R code:
   RIndent
   RNextRChunk
   RPreviousRChunk

   Send line or part of it to R:
   RSendLine
   RDSendLine
   RSendLAndOpenNewOne
   RNLeftPart
   RNRightPart
   RILeftPart
   RIRightPart
   RDSendLineAndInsertOutput

   Send code to R console:
   RSendAboveLines
   RSendSelection
   RESendSelection
   RDSendSelection
   REDSendSelection
   RSendMotion
   RSendSelAndInsertOutput
   RSendMBlock
   RESendMBlock
   RDSendMBlock
   REDSendMBlock
   RSendParagraph
   RESendParagraph
   RDSendParagraph
   REDSendParagraph
   RSendFunction
   RESendFunction
   RDSendFunction
   REDSendFunction
   RSendFile

   Send command to R:
   RHelp
   RPlot
   RSPlot
   RShowArgs
   RShowEx
   RShowRout
   RObjectNames
   RObjectPr
   RObjectStr
   RViewDF	(view data.frame or other object)
   RViewDFs	(view object in split window)
   RViewDFv	(view object in vertically split window)
   RViewDFa	(view object in split window above the current one)
   RDputObj
   RSetwd
   RSummary
   RListSpace

   Support to Sweave and knitr:
   RSendChunk
   RDSendChunk
   RESendChunk
   REDSendChunk
   RSendChunkFH	(from the first chunk to here)
   RBibTeX	(Sweave)
   RBibTeXK	(Knitr)
   RSweave
   RKnit
   RMakeHTML
   RMakePDF	(Sweave)
   RMakePDFK	(Knitr)
   RMakePDFKb	(.Rmd, beamer)
   RMakeODT	(.Rmd, Open document)
   RMakeWord	(.Rmd, Word document)
   RMakeRmd	(rmarkdown default)
   RMakeAll	(rmarkdown all in YAML)
   ROpenPDF
   RSyncFor	(SyncTeX search forward)
   RGoToTeX	(Got to LaTeX output)
   RSpinFile
   RNextRChunk
   RPreviousRChunk

   Support for Quarto:
   RQuartoRender
   RQuartoPreview
   RQuartoStop

   Debugging functions:
   RDebug
   RUndebug

   Object browser:
   RUpdateObjBrowser
   ROpenLists
   RCloseLists

See also: |user_maps_only| and |disable_cmds|.

The completion of function arguments only happens in Insert mode.

The plugin also contains a function called RAction which allows you to build
ad-hoc commands to R. This function takes the name of an R function such as
"levels" or "table" and the word under the cursor, and passes them to R as a
command.

For example, if your cursor is sitting on top of the object called gender and
you call the RAction function, with an argument such as levels, Neovim will
pass the command `levels(gender)` to R, which will show you the levels of the
object gender. To make it even easier to use this and other functions, you
could write custom key bindings in your |init.lua|, as in the examples below:
>vim
   nmap <silent> <LocalLeader>rk :call RAction("levels")<CR>
   nmap <silent> <LocalLeader>t :call RAction("tail")<CR>
   nmap <silent> <LocalLeader>H :call RAction("head")<CR>
<
If you want an action over an selection, then the second argument must be the
string `"v"`:
>vim
   vmap <silent> <LocalLeader>h :call RAction("head", "v")<CR>
<
In this case, the beginning and the end of the selection must be in the same
line.

If either a second or a third optional argument starts with a comma, it will
be inserted as argument(s) to the RAction function. Examples:
>vim
   nmap <silent> <LocalLeader>h :call RAction('head', ', n = 10')<CR>
   nmap <silent> <LocalLeader>t :call RAction('tail', ', n = 10, addrownums = FALSE')<CR>
<
If the command that you want to send does not require an R object as argument,
you can create a shortcut to it by following the example:
>vim
   map <silent> <LocalLeader>s :call g:SendCmdToR("search()")<CR>
<
See also: |source|.


==============================================================================
8. News                                                          *R-Nvim-news*

For old news, see https://github.com/jalvesaq/Nvim-R

vim:tw=78:ts=8:ft=help:norl
